Verification of Abstract Interpretations using Multi-Language Semantics

With separate compilation and foreign language interfaces, two
programs interact at program boundaries through imports and exports.
When analyzing a program in isolation, a sound analysis must
account for all possible imported values and downstream program
behaviors depending on them.
For example, abstract interpretations typically introduce 'unknown'
values; imports are unknown, and applying an unknown function produces another unknown value.
Argument values provided to unknown functions \emph{escape}.
Unknown values precisely represent the values coming from the \emph{external}
context, as well as the internal values that have escaped.
But to precisely characterize the external context, we need a
multi-language semantics that combines the two language semantics
(which may be the same language for separate compilation) with
appropriate boundary forms.
The multi-language semantics enables us to distinguish values emerging
from the different program contexts, and the boundary forms allow us
to track values crossing the program boundary.

Oftentimes, abstract interpretations do more than just run the
program; they collect additional information about the program trace
while running.
For example, whether two values are always the same (alias analysis),
which calls can apply which functions (control flow analysis),
and whether a contract is always satisfied (gradual typing).
Soundness of the analysis is proven against the concrete collecting
semantics, which also collects information about the program trace:
the events that the analysis observes must be a superset of the events
the concrete semantics observes.
The multi-language semantics naturally allows us to partition the
observable events into "external," "internal," and "boundary," which
allows the analysis to be proven sound.
In this talk, we will present this technique in detail and describe
how we are using it to mechanize program analyses for flow-directed
transformations in CertiCoq.

--------------------------------------------------


Oftentimes, abstract interpretation discovers useful facts about
programs by recording a series of observable trace events with a
collecting semantics.

In the above scenario, the analysis is
interested in the events whenever a value cross the program boundary.

But we can generalize the interests to talk about events such as the
parity of integer variables (data flow analysis), at which call a
function can be applied (0-CFA), whether a contract is always
satisfied statically (gradual typing), etc.

Modeling such collecting semantics in the style of the multi-language
semantics naturally distinguishes events collected from different
program context.

Therefore, the soundness proof of any such analysis shall be
carried out with the proper trace events and a more refined treatment
of unknowns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Verification of Abstract Interpretation using Multi-Language Semantics

In the context of separate compilation and foreign function
interfaces, two different programs in the same or different languages
interact at the program boundaries.
BQ: {
    I kind of like inserting something about dynamic/interpreted languages in here too (that's the gradual typing setting).
    I think you had this before and you could add it back in --- just 3 or 4 words.
}
When analyzing each of the program, an abstract interpretation always
has to make conservative decisions for any values that may cross the
program boundary.
BQ: {
    I think the following gets the point across a bit better (don't worry about length)
    When analyzing a program in isolation, an abstract interpretation
    must treat values beyond its context (imports, etc.) soundly, and
    have an appropriate treatment of internal values that escape.
}
Typically, the soundness proof of the analysis has to treat them as if
they can behave as any values.
BQ: {
    What is "them"? (I think you should separate external values that
    are crossing the boundary from the internal ones: in the analysis, the
    former are abstracted to "<>" whereas the latter are standard abstract
    values)
}
However, this notion of 'any values' can be made more precise if we
can model how the two programs interact.
By incorporating the two language semantics with appropriate
boundaries, we can set up a multi-language semantics to model such
interactions.
BQ: {
    Merge the above two sentences.
}
This naturally enables us to distinguish values emerging from
different program contexts.
BQ: {
    Maybe merge this one in too.
    For trace events, it's also about distinguishing *which context* the computation is happening in
}
Consequently, by separating values that never cross the program
boundary from values that may cross, we can reason what happens at the
program boundaries more accurately and soundly.
BQ: {
    You may be getting too abstract or technical here.
    Really, we are being more accurate about the *concrete* world, and not the abstract?
}
In this talk, we will discuss this general technique for showing
soundness of abstract interpretation using the style of multi-language semantics.

Oftentimes, abstract interpretation discovers useful facts about
programs by collecting a series of observable events during the program trace.
For instance, whether integer variables are even or odd, which
functions each call can apply, and which values could possibly cross
the program boundary.
As another example from gradual typing, what possible contracts a
value needs to satisfy and whether a contract is always satisfied.
BQ: {
    This still sounds really weird.
}
Modeling such collecting semantics in the style of the multi-language
semantics naturally distinguishes events collected from different
program context.
BQ: {
    I think you're still missing the punchline.
    What is distinguishing which context the events happen in useful?
    Everytime you write a sentence, the next sentence should answer the question "why does this matter?"
}

```
LING:
The first paragraph has two objectives.
1. point out the subtle treatment of 'any values'.
2. answer why multi-language semantics?

The second paragraph has two objectives.
1. introduce the idea of observable trace events and give some examples
2. answer how it is related to multi-language semantics
```

-------------------------------------------------------------------

Verification of Abstract-interpretation Based Analysis with Separate Compilation and FFIs

BQ: {
    Don't need to used the word "based" around abstract interpretation analyses.
    It's needlessly wordy for titles and abstracts.
    We also don't need to mention FFIs in the title.
}

In the context of separate compilation, a static analysis always has
to make conservative decisions for imported/exported values by
assuming they can behave like any possible values. Similar situations
also apply to values that may flow into or out of the program through
foreign language interfaces (FFI)s. As a result, these values impose
extra challenges for the soundness of any static analysis. In
this talk, we will discuss a general technique to prove the
soundness of abstract interpretations in the context of
separate compilation and FFIs.

by modeling an abstract collecting semantics in the style of
a multi-language semantics, where same/different language interactions
can be expressed naturally.

More concretely, abstract-interpretation analyses reason about concrete values
and program semantics by mapping them onto abstract domains and
abstract semantics.
Moreover, they allow us to collect a series of observable
trace events and discover useful facts inside our programs.
BQ: {
    which technique? (rhetorical)
    It's more that your analysis will need to collect facts, and in
    order to prove that sound, it's necessary for your concrete
    semantics to *also* do that, so that you can actually prove the
    abstract semantics is an overapproximation of something.
    The "collecting semantics" is the concrete semantics, plus these extra pieces.
}
For instance, in the context of flow analysis, whether an
integer is even or odd, which calls an function may be applied at, and
which values could possibly cross the program boundary.
In terms of gradual typing, what possible contracts a value needs to
satisfy and whether a contract is always correct.
BQ: {
    What is the point of this sentence at this point?
    Is it to give an example?
    I would say something along the lines "As another example, in the context of gradual typing, ..."
    You write down contracts in order to catch invalid objects. Think of it as the code defending itself against bad objects.
    In that sense, contracts aren't really "correct," but they can be satisfied or invalid.
}
However, the soundness proofs from previous approaches don't
generalize well in the context of separate compilation and FFIs.
BQ: {
    Previous approaches of... abstract interpretations?
    Just say soundness proofs for abstract interpretations.
    Instead of "don't generalize well," maybe "don't na\"ively generalize"?
    You can probably drop the FFIs here.
}
We show how to establish a unified proof technique for any such
analysis by modeling an abstract collecting semantics in the style of
a multi-language semantics, where same/different language interactions
can be expressed naturally.
BQ: {
    Unified in what sense?
    Again, abstract collecting semantics is not a thing.
    There are the abstract semantics (the analysis), and the (concrete) collecting semantics.
    I think it would be better to put the punchline (multilanguage semantics) earlier, and give some overview of how that helps you with the proofs.
    This abstract is still "missing the point"
    What's the point of using the multi-language semantics?
    What does it do for you that helps you fix your soundness proofs?
    As Pete taught me, technical abstracts and papers should not be a "mystery" --- the reader shouldn't be guessing or confused.
    You should lay it out for them so they can understand as much as possible.
    The abstract is all about balancing giving the reader an accurate overview of your ideas and presentation, while not getting technical.
}

multi-lang allows us to distinguish

    separate such events from different programs

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Verification of Abstract-interpretation Based Analysis with Separate Compilation and FFIs

In the context of separate compilation, a static analysis always has to
make conservative decisions with imported/exported values by assuming
they can behave like any possible values. Similar situations also apply to
values that may flow into or out of the program through foreign language
interfaces (FFI)s.
BQ: {
    often? I would say almost always. What do you mean by "any other
    values"? I would be more specific, saying something "since these values
    are not known at compile time, the analysis must account for any possible value
}
Similarly, the analysis doesn't have more information for values that
may flow into or out the program through foreign language interfaces
(FFI)s either.
BQ: {
    No, you *can* figure out which values flow out through FFIs.
}
These values that may cross the program boundary can not only decrease
the precision of the analysis but also impose extra challenges when it
comes to compiler verfication.
BQ: {
    Not compiler verification, analysis soundness proofs.
    Broaden and generalize our goal.
    It decreases the precision, but in a way that is fundamentally impossible to overcome.
    So I wouldn't really call that decreasing the precision.
    I would combine this sentence with the previous.
}
A verified compiler cannot easily make specialized decisions
for a particular value without a proof that the value never crosses
such compilation unit boundary.
BQ: {
    This is a proof technique for all sorts of analyses, for all sorts of compilers, including paper proofs.
    I wouldn't restrict to verified compilers.
    Also, drop "framework."
    "Make specialized decisions ..." -> "change the representation of values that cross compilation unit or FFI boundaries.
}
In this talk, we will discuss a general technique for verifying
abstract-interpretation analyses in the context of separate
compilation and FFIs.
BQ: {
    "framework" -> "technique"
    verifying -> proving soundness of       (generalize our goal. we are just applying it to verified compilers. but people prove analyses sound by hand for papers too)
}
BQ paragraph: {
   We should shorten up this paragraph a bit.
}

Abstract-interpretation analyses reason about
program semantics and concrete values by mapping them onto
finite abstract domains, (e.g. whether an integer is even or odd).
BQ: {
    "what call sites an λ might be applied, whether a value might cross the
    program boundary, and what possible contracts a value needs to
    satisfy, etc. "
    "contracts a value needs to satisfy" this isn't good use of terminology. better to directly reference gradual typing and blame
    these are not about finite abstract domains. these are auxiliary facts you want your analysis to discover
    merge these into the next sentence instead.
}
All these events can be categorized as observable trace
events the analysis is going to collect.
BQ: {
    Add something like "additionally, the concrete "collecting" semantics additionally collects additional facts about the program, in order to prove soundness of the abstraction."
}
We have noticed that if we can model such an abstract collecting
semantics in the style of a multi-language semantics, then we can
obtain a unified framework to tackle a series of interesting compiler
verification problems, such as linking compatibility and FFI
interpolation, once we incorporate such static analysis into our
verified compiler framework.
BQ: {
    "We have noticed" pretty weak language. Maybe "by modelling the collecting semantics in the ..."
    "abstract collecting semantics" - bad. There are the abstract semantics (the analysis), and the (concrete) collecting semantics.
    "framework" -> "technique"
    "compiler verification", etc. -> analysis soundness
}
BQ paragraph: {
   Ok, so what's the point?
   Why is this approach better than previous approaches? (answer: previous approaches are wrong, or don't generalize as well)
   Probably want to mention that existing *implementations* aren't wrong, but the techniques used to reason about them may be unsound.
   It feels like the abstract is missing a punchline. You set up everything, but don't tell me enough about what makes our thing cool, or about what it is. Like what is this multi-language semantics you reference?
}

(* Questions: *)
(* For now, I regard this more of a proof technique for verifing abstract interpretation based analysis.
   Still not quite clear to me whether having <> (Anything external + anything that may interact with the external world) will improve precision the of the actual analysis.
   Can we actually incorporate such a notion in a realistic compiler, say 3CPS? *)

It's not supposed to increase the precision (except to say that <> isn't *every* value)
It's supposed to make your analysis sound, and be the right proof technique for doing that.
The 3CPS compiler already has unknown values in it and push them through the analysis.




```
B:
    f = fun x -> fun y -> x y

    export f

R:
    import f from B

    v1 = ..
    v2 = ...
    <> v1 v2
 ~> <> v2

 ~> <>
 ~> <> (v2 <>)

    <> v ~> <>
    <> v ~> <> (v <>)
```

Trace properties with observable events like static anlysis properties (even/odd, control flow info, compilation unit/FFI boundary crossing) and gradual typing events (blame and contract verification)

Collecting semantics in the style of multi-language semantics

Verification of abstract interpretation based analysis in the context of separate compilation and FFIs
